[Music] good day I'm Norman Wildberger in
today's video we're going to be looking at
mathematical space and starting a discussion
about what mathematical space is and how we
Orient ourselves towards having a proper theory
of mathematical space which doesn't involve the
Infinities that are usually associated with a
real number tree treatment okay so we're going
to be talking about some basic orientation here
and I want to get at this fundamental duality in
Geometry which is not widely appreciated very
important that you um get a sense of the fact
that there's really two sides of the coin when it
comes to talking about space in mathematics okay
so a natural question is what is space well this
is largely a physical and philosophical question
the physicists are are very interested in the fine
structure of space but we know that our resolution
our ability to understand things to see smaller
things is sort of limited roughly to about 10
to Theus 30 m and beyond that our capability
of understanding what's going on is rather
limited so we only have a partial understanding
of what physical space really is about and also
complimentary to that we don't really know what
space looks like in the very large we don't have
a very good idea a of the large scale structure of
our universe there are all kinds of philosophical
questions that have been discussed and debated
about this issue over many centuries in particular
K had uh very important ideas about the nature of
space and our understanding of it but what we want
to do is free ourselves to a certain extent from
physical or philosophical discussions so we want
to ask how do we mathematically represent space
this is a mathematical question okay so uh there's
three key insights that I want to share with you
that I think really help us Orient ourselves in
the right direction with regard to this question
the first is um to acknowledge this fundamental
Duality that there is an apine and a projective
view of space and that they are complimentary
so I'm going to explain these terms but you
should appreciate right from the beginning
that there are two ways of thinking about things
an affine way whatever that is and a projective
way whatever that is neither of them are really
more important than the other you should think
of them as complimentary secondly that space
comes in many dimensions of course the space
that we live in appears to be three-dimensional
perhaps four-dimensional if we include time but
uclid of course also was very interested in the
two-dimensional situation of geometry in the plane
or on a page but it's useful to think about space
as actually occurring in many possible dimensions
and not just starting with two also onedimensional
space is very interesting as we'll see this might
be an example of a one-dimensional space a Zero
Dimensional space that's also at least worth
mentioning which is maybe just a point maybe not
too interesting but the onedimensional space we'll
see is very interesting and contains all kinds of
very fascinating relations and then there's this
natural hierarchy one Dimensions two dimensions
three dimensions and so on and we should keep
this in mind that there's a sort of a hierarchy of
possible Dimensions uh to think about when we're
thinking about space and finally that arithmetic
is the building block this is really the cartisian
Insight that changed the direction of mathematics
so much in the 17th century decart fmats idea that
we could really pin geometry down to a prior
theory of arithmetic of course the arithmetic
for us will be the arithmetic at least to begin
with of rational numbers that will be our main
model for arithmetic and so that will be the main
tool or arithmetical tool that we use to build up
our notion of space okay so three very important
initial orientations that you might like to think
about the cartisian revolution in Geometry
initiated by Rene deart in the 17th century
changed our view forever about what geometry is
and one way of saying what was happening is that
a coordinate system a fixed coordinate system
is introduced and in the plane it allows us to
represent points by ordered pairs of numbers
so here's an X axis a y AIS but you note that
I haven't uh made them exactly perpendicular
and also the scale on the axes isn't really
corresponding here the scale seems smaller than
the one in the y direction nevertheless once we
have such a framework of axes we can use Notions
of parallel lines to represent points by ordered
pairs of numbers namely the x coordinate in this
case 2 and the y-coordinate in this case one so
we can say this is the point 21 and note that
we're going to use square brackets to denote
points which I generally like to do in addition
to points we can also talk about lines and more
General curves by thinking about equations in
X and Y for example the equation X2 + y^2 = 1
equation of a circle which in this case looks
something like this it doesn't quite look like
a circle here because the axes have been scaled
in different ways so it actually appears as lips
okay so very powerful idea we've talked about
this before the idea that once we have fixed
axes we can talk about points very concretely in
terms of ordered pairs we can talk about curves
lines in terms of their equations and we have to
also mention that in fact the idea of coordinates
is not entirely new not entirely a 17th century
idea the ancient Greeks did use coordinates for
sure appolloni for example used coordinates
in his study of conics for example he had a
notion of conjugate diameters that if you take
the center of an ellipse like this and you draw
any line through it you can call that a diameter
okay and this diameter is bisected by that Center
so this segment is equal to that segment and then
he noted that if you take parallel lines and you
also bict them so you split them in two split them
in two you get these midpoints which end up lying
on another diameter and then if you look at lines
which are parallel to this diameter and you split
them in two as well BCT them by these points here
then you uh recover the original diameter so we
call these conjugate diameters and he realized
that they provide a framework for investigating
properties of a conic basically a coordinate
system uh very much in this direction except
that the coordinate system is sort of built
from the conic where in this view we start
with a coordinate system and then we think about
arbitrary curves within that fixed coordinate
system okay but in any case it's a very important
idea and it allows us to reduce questions of
geometry to questions of algebra and essentially
arithmetic of course it depends very much on us
having a prior understanding of the numbers that
we're using to label one axis in particular okay
so now we can follow day cart and introduce
an apine view of geometry so we're going to
Define what points in various dimensions are
and we're going to here work over the rational
numbers which means that all numbers will be
rational numbers unless otherwise specified
all right so here's some definitions definition
of a one point definition of a two-o definition
of a three-point okay so what is a onepoint a
onepoint is an expression of this form it's an
expression involving a square bracket a number
and another square bracket a left square bracket
a right square bracket and inside is a rational
number number say little a and this object will
typically denote by a capital letter like capital
A so this is what we mean by a one point a twoo
on the other hand is something rather similar
except that it has two rational numbers inside
separated by a comma so left bracket A1 comma
A2 right bracket where A1 and A2 are rational
numbers that's what a twoo is and a threo well
very much the same kind of thing except that now
we have three rational numbers A1 A2 and
A3 separated by commas inside the square
brackets so notice that we're not just defining
point we're defining things a little bit more
precisely first one points then two points then
three points and you could see that we could very
easily carry on and Define Four Points Five Points
and maybe end points and in a little while we'll
do that but for now let's just stick with these
three different kinds of points now note that
the definitions that I gave of the one point
two point and three point are independent of
any pictures I didn't show you any pictures that
go with the definitions the objects themselves
were defined purely algebraically purely in terms
of how we actually write them down that doesn't
mean that these Concepts have no geometric
meaning not at all rather it means that we do
not specify which geometric meaning they have
we allow the possibility that the Expressions
that we are writing down can be interpreted in
quite different ways by different people so yes
we may have a geometrical meaning in mind but
somebody else may have a somewhat different or
maybe completely different geometrical meaning to
the Expressions that we write down so this is a
sort of an expression oriented uh View and for
those of you who have watched my earlier video
which is a entitled something like expression
versus objectoriented mathematics you will know
that I'm inclined towards the importance of
Expressions okay so for example suppose you
have the 2.2 comma 1 right so one view perhaps the
most familiar view of what that means is this one
here we have an X axis a y- axis equal scaling
along both axes the axes are perpendicular it's
our standard cartisian plane we have two in this
Direction one in this Direction that's the point
21 so we have this mental image that the 2.2
comma 1 represents that point in this picture
but it might be possible for someone else to
come along and say okay I'm going to draw my
x- Axis in this direction and my y- AIS in this
direction and I'm going to make the scaling along
the x- axis perhaps different from the scaling
along the y- axis I can still use the same idea
I can still draw lines which are parallel to the
axes to find the point which is two over in this
x Direction and one over in the y direction and I
can plot it there and I can say there's the point
21 somewhat less familiar we could also
perhaps imagine a situation where in some
application it's useful to have a different
kind of coordinate system maybe one that's
not made out of straight lines but that
has some parabas involved so here's a
coordinate system that has lines vertical
lines as usual but but instead of having
horizontal lines we seem to have parabas right
if this is the origin then this would be the
xaxis and here is the line Y = 1 here is the
line Y = 2 here's the line Y = -1 okay so for
some purposes it might be interesting to
think about geometry in this context in
that case where would the point 21 be well
one natural interpretation to say all right
this is the origin we should go two in the X
direction we should go one in the y direction we
should sort of be consistent and so maybe this
point up here is a natural candidate for the
2.21 and there might be quite a lot of other
different ways of thinking about things the
point is that algebraically we're defining the two
point rather simply a computer has no problem in
checking that this is a two-point because the
computer looks to see a left bracket yes and
then a number and then a comma not a period or a
semicolon or anything else it has to be a comma
and then another rational number and then a right
bracket and the brackets are square brackets all
right the computer can check those things and say
yes that is a two point the computer doesn't have
to concern itself with what it actually looks like
I'd like to draw your attention to the case of
the one point deceptively simple so here's a one
point it name is a and it consists of the number
4/3 in square brackets notice that this object
is a different kind of object than a number it's
not really the same as the number 4/3 because
it's enclosed in square brackets the computer
can tell that this is something different from a
number because of the existence of those square
brackets around it okay so we're going to have to
introduce new types of mathematical objects which
is something we like to do expanding our Horizon
expanding the uh range of things that we can talk
about okay so let's start with one point here's a
one point a square bracket number square bracket
what should we say well let's say that this is of
type well it's maybe logical to say rational with
square brackets around it so we'll say rat with
square brackets around it that is the type of
this object we shouldn't say that it's of type
rat just by itself because it's not a rational
number it's something different it's a rational
number in Brackets so we're going to use this
notation to specify the type of this object now
this might be a little bit cumbersome sometimes
so we're introduce uh a variant we're going to
say that a super one is another name for this
type of object basically fine one space a for
fine a twoo like this one here is of type okay
we might in introduce this idea rat with a square
up there also everything in square brackets that
means a two-o and a shorter way of describing that
maybe a 2 standing for apine two-dimensional space
and a threep point like this one well that's of
type rat cubed in square brackets or a cubed so
we use these uh symbols a super one a super 2 a
super 3 when the number system is already known
in this case we have before said that we're
going to be working over the rational numbers
but it might be later on that we are a little bit
more flexible about what number system we want to
use that's going to be very important in fact so
U we allow ourselves the future possibility that
these rational number systems in here are going
to be replaced with something else okay so we'll
still use this kind of uh generic type when the
number system is fixed and known but maybe it's
rationals and maybe it's something else maybe
it's a finite field or a finite extension field
of the rationals these are things that we're
going to talk about in the future okay but
they are going to provide um extra domains or
extra places where we can think about geometry
all right so this is sort of interesting um
no notation some new very Elementary kinds
of objects just built from our rational numbers
by putting them in square brackets and perhaps
stringing a few of them together and this is
the apine view of geometry it's one that will
be very familiar to you because if you've done
high school geometry University geometry you're
very familiar with points as ordered pairs or
triples of numbers and so on now I want to turn
to a much less studied point of view of geometry
the other side of the coin instead of the apine
view of geometry there is a projective view of
geometry which is ultimately mathematically just
as important as this apine one even though these
days it sees much less development unfortunately
maybe we can start turning that around a little
bit okay so projective geometry very important
subject that really needs to be re introduced into
schools and universities so let's have a look at
the fundamentals of projective geometry so the
idea of projective geometry really goes back to
the ancient Greeks and uh you might have a look
at the math foundations 20 video which is about
uclid and proportions so the idea of proportions
is uh going back to the ancient Greeks and it's
the key uh sort of idea setting up projective
view of geometry so here's the main definition
that a two proportion is an expression of the
form a to B this is a colon two dots we'll read
this as a to B where A and B are numbers for us
that means rational numbers not both zero they
cannot both be zero one of them can be zero but
then the other one has to be non zero it cannot
both be zero with the convention that A to B
equals Lambda a to Lambda B for any nonzero
number Lambda we're talking about the proportion
between two numbers you have two numbers and it's
the proportion between them or sometimes the ratio
if you might like to think that's also a valid
way of thinking about it the ratio between
those two numbers is what we're interested
in and if you scale both both of them by the
same factor then the ratio or the proportion
doesn't change so for example the proportion
3 to 4 is the same as the proportion 6 to
8 this proportion this proportion are related by
the fact that if I take Lambda equal 2 multiply
both of these by two then I get this one here's
one uh proportion 1/2 to three that's the same
as three Hales to 9 how did I get this one from
this one I multiplied both of them by the number
three how about 1 to 0 that's a legitimate
proportion that's equal to 7 to 0 why is that
I just multiplied both of these by seven it's also
equal to - 7 over4 to 0 I multiplied both of these
by - 7 over4 and this proportion 0 to- 5 well
that's the same as 0 to 17 over 19 I multiplied
by uh - 17 over 19 * 5 5 in the denominator
okay note again that 0 to0 is not a valid to
proportion okay this is not in the realm of two
proportions okay so this uh idea plays a very
important role in my book which is called Divine
proportions okay my book on rational trigonometry
and Universal geometry and in fact on page 25
uh this definition is taken directly from there
okay of course you should all read my book
at some point right yes okay so this is the
fundamental basic idea uh of a two proportion
so let's observe that every two propor can be
Rewritten as a proportion between integers just
by clearing fractions that's an attractive aspect
of working with proportions in fact it becomes
quite important in computer science um having
to do with transformations of threedimensional
space this is a very important and useful aspect
of dealing with proportions rather than dealing
with numbers directly so for example if we have
the proportion 2/3 to 4 fths might be a little
bit unwieldy because we're dealing with these
fractions well we can multiply both of them by
15 the least common multiple there to get um 10
to 12 of course we could also rewrite that as
5 to six so almost all two proportions can be
written in the canonical form R to one the same
kind of idea that as as long as the second number
is not zero we can multiply both sides by the
inverse of that second element so for example
if we have 2/3 to 4 fths we could rewrite that by
multiplying both of them by 5 over 4 that renders
that second one equal to a one and we get uh 10
over2 so we can rewrite it as 10 over2 to 1 or
5 over 6 to 1 this is another useful flexibility
that we have when we're dealing with proportions
so one thing we can do with proportions is we
can clear denominators another thing we can
do with proportions is we can arrange that the
second entry is one at least almost all the time
the exception is of course one to zero there's
nothing that you can multiply this particular
proportion by to arrange that that second
element is one right so this one here cannot be
scaled to this form all right so if you've been
watching this series you will already have some
experience thinking about proportions because
we talked about this kind of thing in the math
foundations 103 and 104 lectures when we were
talking about extending the rational numbers to
include Infinity may remember that lines through
the origin homogeneous coordinates played a big
role and that's really the same kind of thing
that's happening here all right so how do we get
Geometry out of these proportions all right so
here's the key definition that a projective one
point is an expression of the form P equal a to
B enclosed in square brackets where A to B is a
two proportion of rational numbers just the kind
of object that we've been talking about so if we
take a two proportion and we enclose it in square
brackets then we get a project projective one
point we visualize such a projective one
point as the line in two-dimensional space
through the origin and the point a comma
B so here's two-dimensional space suppose
we're wanting to visualize
the projective one point 2:
one well what we do is we take the point 2
comma 1 which is exactly this point here and
we think about this line that passes through
that point and the origin this line contains
not just this point here of course it contains
all multiples of that point so if we multiply
this point by two to get four or two that'll
also lie on the line if we multiply by minus
a half to get -1 - a half down here it
will also lie on that line so the notion
of equality involved in the two proportion is
exactly the notion involved in identifying all
of these points which lie on this line with the
exception of 0 0 which is not officially a two
proportion okay and uh we should give this new
kind of object a type for now let's introduce
this sort of simple-minded um idea that we're
going to denote the type of a projective
one point with the following expression square
brackets and inside rat to rat so just reminding
us that there's a colon involved that colon is
representing a proportion or two proportion and
a short form sort of analogous to the A1 is a P1
a capital P with a one I also want to draw your
attention to the idea that we're going to think
about projective one points as being labeled by
small letters in general so capital letters for
the one points that we talked about earlier and
small letters for these projective one points
just to help keep them a little bit separate so
we started talking about one points like this
and now we've introduced projective one points
like this if we're talking about both of them
at the same time it's sometimes useful to think
about this one as an apine one point so we can
use that notation or terminology all right so
now I want to talk about the relation between
apine and projective points in this case just
one points so there's a natural association
between this apine one point consisting of
the rational number a and the projective one
point which is given by the proportion a to
one given any rational number we can cook
up this two proportion so that allows us
to go from an apine one point to a projective
one point and this is an natural association
between apine one points and projective one
points which are not of the form 1 to zero
some like this this particular projective one
point doesn't correspond to any apine one point
and there's a very important geometrical
picture which I've drawn quite a few times
in my various videos but it's worth
reviewing so here's two-dimensional
cartisian plane x-axis Y axis here's
a point RS it's actually a point x
coordinate r y coordinate s there it is
right there the line through that point
and the origin that line is what we can
think of as the projective one point R
2s and that projective one point can be
Rewritten as r/ s to one at least if s is
not equal to zero as it is in this situation
here and geometrically that's telling us that
the point RS is on this line but also this
point here the point r/ s comma 1 is also
on that line just obtained by scaling this
point by dividing it by S so we divide both
coordinates by S we get this point down here
and then that lies on this line coordinate y =
1 this is a way for us to associate to points
fine and one points which we can think of as
being on this line to projective one points
which we can think of as lines like this so
to a pro itive one point like this we can
associate that Aline one point right there
and correspondingly to an apine one point which
we can think of as being on this green line say
that one there we can associate a projective
one point like that the only projective one
point which doesn't get included in that story
is this horizontal one which I've drawn here it's
coordinates are one to zero and some sense
this plays the role of infinity uh in a way
that we seen before when we were talking about
extending the rational numbers to Infinity in
those earlier 103 and 104 lectures so we have
this sort of understanding geometrically that
the projective one-dimensional space is equal to
the Aline one-dimensional space together with one
more point which we might call Infinity which
is really just this special projective 1.1 to
zero okay what about projective two points and
projective three points well we can talk about
those later but um because projective geometry
is so much less familiar to most students than
apine geometry it's probably good to stick with
just the one-dimensional projective situation
for now in my next video I want to now explore a
little bit about some remarkable mathematics that
we can see even in the onedimensional situation
that we've been talking about in fact even in the
apine one-dimensional situation and this will be
a really good example of opening our eyes to the
wonders of looking at things algebraically rather
than transcendentally restricting ourselves to
finite operations that we can actually do rather
than talk about infinite operations that we can't
really do but just can talk about okay so we're
going to see very specific examples of concrete
mathematical results that are visible from this
logical clear algebraic point of view in fact
I'm going to show you what in my opinion is
the second most important theorem in all of
mathematics okay the second most important
theorem in all of mathematics we're going
to see next time in the aine onedimensional case
very interesting and uh important uh insights to
be obtained here so I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman wildberger thanks for [Music]
listening